Research
================

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Short-term vs. Long-term trends in moisture availability

![Study Area within the Western Boreal Shield of
Ontario](Figure1_StudyArea.jpg)

Climate warming is expected to increase wildfire intensity by creating
conditions that are more conduhigh-severityseverity burning events.
Rising temperatures across the boreal forest often coincide with
reductions in both winter and summer precipitation that result in a
water shortage. A growing concern is that a reduction in moisture
availability at over short-time periods (i.e., monthly timescale)
increases the availability and flammability of fuel and hence high
probability of severe burning events. Yet across multiple years, the
temporal cumulative water shortage deficit can limit tree growth and
consequently fuel availability that ultimately decrease wildfire
severity. Under climate change, how the variability in temporal moisture
availability will affect wildfire intensity is uncertain. Here, we
examine the variability on burn severity events in Ontario’s boreal
forest according to near-term trends in moisture availability using
remotely sensed burn data of burn severity (median and extreme) and
climate data from 1986-2020. To compare the relative influence of two
separate measures of antecedent moisture availability (Climate Moisture
Index; CMI, Relative Humidity; RH) at monthly and yearly timescales on
trends in burn severity, we use a stochastic gradient boosted regression
tree approach. We found that short-term moisture dynamics have a greater
influence on burn severity patterns, indicating that patterns of burn
severity may be driven more by fuel moisture than fuel availability.
Time-lags that represented moisture availability in the winter months
were the most influential followed by spring related moisture
availability, suggesting that changes to snow phenology and winter
conditions may be important drivers of wildfire burn severity.

![Relative influence explained by Short vs. long-term
moisture](Figure3_Percent_Influence_Temporal.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The impacts of snow cover on wildfire burn severity in the boreal forest

<div>

<p>

<img src="research_files\figure-commonmark\mermaid-figure-1.png"
style="width:5.33in;height:5.33in" />

</p>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------
